(#23) Document functional tests (#24)
elastic/metricbeat-tests-poc: metricbeat-tests/README.md

Because we are decoupling the specs, configuration files, and tests for each module in different files, if desired, we will be able to instrument the test runner to run a module in isolation.

On the contrary, we will be able to run all tests in a single run.

### Verify that metricbeat sends metrics to Elasticsearch
In a previous approach, we simply verified that Metricbeat sent metrics to an output file. Once this POC is more mature, we are able now to verify it sends metrics to an Elasticsearch. At that point, we query Elasticsearch checking that there are no errors in the index.

### Run tests locally
We want the developers to be able to run the tests locally in an easy manner. Using local build tools, like `Make` we are wrapping up the main tasks in these project, so that we must learn just a few commands. If you do not want to use `Make` the test runner uses `go test` under the hood, so it's super easy to understand what's going on in terms of Go context. Our recommendation is to use the `Make` wrapper, or to use the `Godog` test runner.

For the CI, we have a set of scripts preparing the environment, so that a build is totally repeatable.

### Improve Developer Experience

> A consequence of the above goal, is that it's easier to run the tests, so a developer is more willing to participate in the development checking that his/her changes are still valid.

Reviewer: Cosmetic:

```suggestion
A consequence of the above goal is that it's easier to run the tests, developers are more willing to participate in the development checking that their changes are still valid.
```

### Run tests against the integrations compatibility matrix

> With the Scenario outline approach, wehere we provide a table of possible values, it's possible to iterate through that table and execute a test per row. So if we are smart enough to build the table in the proper manner, then we will be able to create a compatibility matrix for each version of the integration module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the Scenario outline approach, where we provide a table of possible values, it's possible to iterate through that table and execute a test per row. So if we are smart enough to build the table in the proper manner, then we will be able to create a compatibility matrix for each version of the integration module.
```

## Technology stack

As we want to run _functional tests_, we need a manner to describe the functionality to implement in a _functional manner_, which means using plain English to specify how our software behaves. The most accepted manner to achieve this specification in the software industry, using a high level approach that anybody in the team could understand and backed by a testing framework, is [`Cucumber`](https://cucumber.io). So we will use `Cucumber` to set the behaviour (use cases) of our software.

Then we need a manner to connect that plain English feature specification with code. Fortunately, `Cucumber` has a wide number of implementations (Java, Ruby, NodeJS, Go...), so we can choose one of them to implement our tests.

As metricbeat is a Golang project, we are going to use Golang for writing the functional tests, so we would need the Golang implementation for `Cucumber`. That implementation is [`Godog`](https://github.com/DATA-DOG/godog), which is the glue between the specs files and the Go code. Godog is a wrapper over the traditional `go test` command, adding the ability to run the functional steps defined in the feature files.

### Integration Modules

> The integration modules supported by Metricbeat will be satarted in the form of Docker containers. To manage the life cycle of those containers in test time we are going to use [`Testcontainers`](https://testcontainers.org), a set of libraries to simplify the usage of the Docker client, attaching container life cycles to the tests, so whenever the tests finish, the containers will stop in consequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The integration modules supported by Metricbeat will be started in the form of Docker containers. To manage the life cycle of those containers in test time we are going to use [`Testcontainers`](https://testcontainers.org), a set of libraries to simplify the usage of the Docker client, attaching container life cycles to the tests, so whenever the tests finish, the containers will stop in consequence.
```

> The integration modules supported by Metricbeat will be satarted in the form of Docker containers. To manage the life cycle of those containers in test time we are going to use [`Testcontainers`](https://testcontainers.org), a set of libraries to simplify the usage of the Docker client, attaching container life cycles to the tests, so whenever the tests finish, the containers will stop in consequence.

Author: Applied

    s.Step(`^metricbeat "([^"]*)" is installed and configured for Redis module$`, metricbeatIsInstalledAndConfiguredForRedisModule)
    // this last function is common a to all the modules
    // so it will be declared at framework/test runner level (see runner_test.go)
	s.Step(`^there are no errors in the "([^"]*)" index$`, thereAreNoErrorsInTheIndex)
}

```

## Running the tests
At this moment, the CLI and the functional tests coexist in the same repository, that's why we are building the CLI to get access to its features. Eventually that would change and we would consume it as a binary. Meanwhile:

```shell
$ make build-binary        # generates the binary from the repository
$ make run-elastic-stack   # runs the stack for metricbeat
$ make functional-tests    # runs the test suite
```

You could set up the environment so that it's possible to run one single module. As we are using _tags_ for matching modules, we could tell `make` to run just the tests for redis:

```shell
$ LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG FLAG="-t" FEATURE="redis" make functional-test
```
where:

- LOG_LEVEL: sets the default log level in the tool (DEBUG, INFO, WARN, ERROR, FATAL)

> - FLAG: if set as `-t`, it will tell `Godog` to fileter by tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- FLAG: if set as `-t`, it will tell `Godog` to filter by tag.
```

- FEATURE: sets the tag to filter by (apache, mysql, redis)

> 

Reviewer 2: I'd also add how to test a feature using `godog` command.

Author: Added!

> # Functional tests for Metricbeat Integrations

Reviewer 3: I assume we are focusing on metricbeat at this point, but the scope woul also include filebeat and in the future the new "integrations" (which will involve greater kibana interaction to install them)

Author: Yes. As this POC is for metricbeat, we are referring just to it everywhere. We can eventually change to cover all beats family

```shell
$ LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG FLAG="-t" FEATURE="redis" make functional-test
```
where:

- LOG_LEVEL: sets the default log level in the tool (DEBUG, INFO, WARN, ERROR, FATAL)
- FLAG: if set as `-t`, it will tell `Godog` to filter by tag.
- FEATURE: sets the tag to filter by (apache, mysql, redis)

### Advanced usage
There are some environment variables you can use to improve the experience running the tests with `Make`.

- **METRICBEAT_FETCH_TIMEOUT** (default: 20). This is the time in seconds we leave metricbeat grabbing metrics from the monitored integration module.
- **QUERY_MAX_ATTEMPTS** (default: 5). It's possible that the Elasticsearch is not ready for writes, so we can define a retry strategy to wait for our index to be ready. This variable defines the number of attempts the retry process will happen.
- **RETRY_TIMEOUT** (default: 3). For same reason as above, this variable defines the delay between attempts, before a successful connection to Elasticsearch is made.

>Interested in running the tests directly using Godog? Please check out [the Makefile](./Makefile#L19).

```shell

> export OP_LOG_LEVEL=${OP_LOG_LEVEL:-INFO}

Reviewer: To avoid duplicating this content, would it be possible to include what env variables are available in https://github.com/elastic/metricbeat-tests-poc/tree/master/cli and add a reference here?

Author: I added a link to them, as they are already described in CLI's docs
